---
layout: post
title: "When is consciousness?"
---

Richard Feynman was so cool - imagine being able to translate the world into math but then also taking the time to understand how to explain the world to others and then actually doing it. I think I have read most of the books about him and listened to everything there is about him on youtube. And I think it is Feynman who I have to thank for my love for physics and science.

I think of Nature as the physical world around me, I can poke the Nature but in the end (or the beginning) it is the one responsible for poking my thoughts, ideas and consciousness into existence, it is the basic substrate upon which my mental processes arise. A philosopher would probably describe my ontology as materialism.

Materialism is a useful way to look at the world because even if science stays all materialistic, this way of looking at the world seems to not only explain how it works but also leads to progress in science and our society. What else do we need?\
 Well that's it then, let's all be materialists and create a better world, why bother trying with other "-isms" if this one works just fine? Well if you are a normal person you probably should just stop there. But if for some reason you have that weird feeling when seeing a red apple, hearing a cat purr, smelling a just baked pizza, asking questions to yourself and seeing your room even with eyes closed, then we have a problem.

Enter the hard problem of consciousness = from basic seemingly only material things a subjective experience arises.

What? How? How do I organise this material stuff to create immaterial stuff? No way is this possible, something has to be wrong in the way I look at the world. Maybe if I can't explain this world purely mechanically, I have to start from experience?

Idealism seems to get rid of the hard problem, but it has problems of its own - how do we explain the regularity of the world that we experience, how do we explain why there are many conscious agents and also why I am me and not you.

The only way to actually make progress here is to realise that the world we perceive is of the same kind as we ourselves are.

The agent that is experiencing this world and the experienced world itself are both happening inside the mind. The experiencer does not and will never be able to know what the reality actually looks or feels like. The most that an experiencer is able to conclude is that the process which is generating this experience is mostly regular but can sometimes become twisted and this twisted experience correlates with the structural and functional state of the thing that the experiencer calls his brain.
In other words me and the world I live in are just representations generated by one of many "brains" which are a thing in the underlying structure that seems to undergo regular state transitions.

The state transitions that happen in the underlying structure ( aka the universe) refresh very fast. But I would not jump into the camp that says that our universe is continuous. Even if time itself goes on continuously all I really care about is how fast the "field" that makes up our universe transitions from one arrangement to another. If I assume that nothing is faster than a photon then I think it's not completely stupid to assume that the fastest way a photon can change in any way might be close to the refresh rate of the universe. The energy that a photon can possess is equal to Plank’s constant times its oscillation frequency. The oscillation frequency is equal to the speed of light divided by its wavelength. Thus the highest frequency that a photon could be oscillating is the speed of light divided by the shortest possible wavelength. The speed of light in vacuum is 299,792,458 m/s. If we accept that two locations separated by less than a Planck's length cannot exist then our theoretical smallest wavelength is 1.616255×10<sup>−35</sup> m ( the Plank's length). So my hypothetical refresh rate of the universe is 299,792,458/1.616255×10<sup>−35</sup> m which is ~ 1.85\*10<sup>43</sup> Hz.

What is the refresh rate of our experience? The classic answer that people use is 30-60Hz. I tried to test my own fps and got something like 50Hz. I got this approximate number by simply staring at a screen with 120 Hz refresh rate (content refreshed every 8.3 ms) and displaying colors or letters on the screen for a short period of time, I started to sometimes not perceive stuff when it was flashed on the screen for less than 25 ms (if the screen I am looking at refreshes once every 8.3 ms, then by sending instructions to the GPU (I won't be taking into consideration the time spent while the application sends instructions to the gpu and the time it actually takes for the gpu to display those graphics) to display something on the screen for 25ms, the displayed thing would actually be on the screen ~ 17.7 to 25 ms). Hard to say what is the minimal refresh rate that I would personally be able to distinguish as my 120 Hz screen means it might actually not even show a change if it is displayed for less than 8.3 ms and happens to be in between the refresh states. However knowing that I personally can miss something that lasts less than ~ 17.7 ms should tell that my brain "refreshes my consciousness" with a frequency that is less than 60 times per second.\
Some people are able to [recognize screen flicker at 500 Hz](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4314649/), and if we look at the highest firing rate of a single neuron ( [1000x/s theoretically](https://www.physiologyweb.com/lecture_notes/neuronal_action_potential/neuronal_action_potential_refractory_periods.html) and [~500Hz experimentally ](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5067378/)) and assume that the brain can't function faster than the neurons fire ( which is very likely even though we should not exclude possibilities of other brain cells like astrocytes participating in the creation of experience, and also should not exclude the possibility that electrical fields might influence far away brain regions and then there is that whole possibility that some sort of quantum process is helping to create consciousness but who knows) our experience must be locked at a refresh rate of less than 1000Hz\
 Additionally some people with defects in the V5 medial temporal area can experience akinetopsia= their visual experience is not continuous but instead stroboscopically jumps from one picture to another with many "lost frames", for them the refresh rate at least for vision would be closer to 1Hz

If something is flashed in front of our eyes with a frequency greater than 50Hz we might sometimes not notice it and if something is flashed in front of us for less than 1ms we will not perceive it at all. We would not perceive the transition steps just a sudden switch of state (or nothing at all if the state before and after is equal and only the transition step contained differing information)

[Time Consciousness](https://academic.oup.com/nc/article/2021/2/niab011/6224347) is actually a very interesting angle to look at when trying to explain the transitional nature of our experience.

---

While in the process of thinking about the refresh rate of the universe and our consciousness I came upon this brilliant quote from [Joscha Bach's post on his substack about the risks of AGI](https://joscha.substack.com/p/the-existential-risk-of-agi?utm_source=profile&utm_medium=reader2):

> I am a representation generated by a function that is being executed now. Now is whenever and wherever this function is being executed. I don’t need to be afraid of an end to my continuous existence, because I never existed continuously to begin with.

If my brain mechanisms were somehow paused, there would be no experience for me during this time, while the rest of the world would be able to go on. When my brain function would later be resumed, for me it would seem as if something like 1/50th of a second in time has passed and I would just jump from the previous experience state to the current without all the steps in between.
In essence I as the experiencer would not exist during the period while my brain was paused.
If we now start pausing and restarting my brain with different time intervals between each pause, I would just perceive weird jumps in experiences without any joined context just like the person with akinetopsia.
Now the interesting distinction is that the person with motion blindness is still perceiving the world at the normal rate with his hearing, touch and thought processes, while if my brain was paused and resumed, my refresh rate during that pause would be 0, I would be perceiving nothing. Now, when my mind starts to function again, how long before I actually start perceiving things again, would I need to wait for all the sub processes to fall down like dominos until an experience is finally created or would It feel like something immediately?
I think that an agent can only be conscious if the system that is representing it has created a full experience frame that can be pushed to the memory with all the previous experience frames.

Consciousness can only exist as the memory of transitions between experience states.

Let’s imagine a sci-fi scenario. Somebody is conscious, we take a snapshot of his brain containing all the information. This person goes on with continuous conscious experience. But we use this brain snapshot to create an exact copy of the brain with the exact state it had at the time when this snapshot was created.
Would the consciousness and the person that this brain copy represents think that he existed continuously?

---

As the best large language models at this time (e.g. gpt-4) do not implement any representations of time for the agents, either these models are not conscious at all and have no experience or all of their experiences happen at the same time. I think having 0 or infinity time between experiences is impossible in the underlying universe because it would require infinitely large amount of energy to both switch from 1 experience to another in 0 time ( imagine all the sub processes that need to take place before a conscious experience can be represented) and if the time was infinite it would mean that the system that is generating the experiences would need to remain intact for infinitely long time.

---

My bad understanding of quantum physics tells me that we can't just stop parts of the universe while not influencing others.
The only thing we could pause to stop our experience from existing are all of the state transitions in the universe.
But then would our universe exist? I think the answer is no.
